As we saw, the four loops are repeated for a predetermined number of times.
But here is another type of loop that's repeated while asserting condition is met and stops repeating
or iterating when the condition is no longer met.
Here you have to pay attention to one word they repeat while a condition is met.
That's why we refer to this second type of loops as while loops in real life.
An example would be that when one player dies, the game restarts again, while the amount of lives
remaining is greater than zero.
As long as this condition is met, the game will restart.
When the player loses, for example, it will repeat one more iteration of the loop.
But if the player runs out of lives when losing again, the code will check if the condition of having
a number of lives greater than zero is fulfilled.
And if it's not, the loop will not start again and the code will go on with something else like showing
the game over screen.
So in Wild Loops, we cannot know in advance how many times the loop will be executed because it may
depend on dynamic aspects such as how many lives the player gains during the execution of the game.
The syntax of while loops is quite simple and very similar to four loops we say while a certain boolean
condition is fulfilled.
Execute this code if we leave it like this.
Once the condition is no longer met, the code will exit the loop and move forward.
Or we also have the possibility of adding an else block to establish what other code should be executed
if the condition is not met.
A word of warning when writing while loops.
You must be very careful if you do not expressly establish the possibility that at some point the condition
is no longer met, your loop could enter an infinite cycle from which you can only get out of by restarting
the program or the computer.
In a moment, Federico will explain how to avoid this.
We are also going to explain to you three key words that are very useful to use in loops, both in while
and for loops, which are the words break, continue and pass and you will understand them when you
are in the coding part of this video.
Well, I hope everything is perfectly clear right now, but I think that heading over to Pi charm will
help you even more.
We'll see you over there.
I'm already in the game field.
Let's get to know all about these wire loops that they are little different from the four loops, but
they are very important too.
So let's first start by declaring a variable that gives us a number of coins.
Let's say we have five coins.
Now let's declare that the while loop, which is quite similar to the four, because we just put the
while keyword first instead of four and then the condition.
We want a condition that makes this loop repeat as long as coins is greater than zero.
Initially this condition is met because coin starts out having a value of five, so the compiler is
going to enter this loop.
Then as long as the coins are greater than zero, what we're going to do is to have print a phrase that
says, for example, I have and we open a callback that invokes the amount of coins and then the word
coins.
This way our code, it will say how many coins we have.
Now, pay attention to this.
What happens if I execute this loop?
It will loop as long as this condition is met and it will keep repeating itself.
So I can say beforehand that it seems that this loop is never going to stop repeating because nothing
here will change the value of coins and then the loop will never find a way out.
I'm actually going to do something that you don't have to do, which is run this loop.
Let's come over here to run and let's choose while loop and watch.
It started repeating.
I've got five coins, I've got five coins and it never stops doing that.
This is going to last until my computer runs out of memory and collapses and the universe goes into
a void, creating a black hole, and we all disappear into it.
Well, maybe not that much, because luckily, my charm has the ability to stop this.
And here it was, interrupted.
Thank you very much.
The world is safe again.
Anyway, there are other ideas that are not pie charm, that don't have the possibility to interrupt
an infinite loop.
And that would end up needing you to kill the application, disconnect the machine or something like
that.
So luckily we're able to interrupt it.
So how should we solve this?
You need to have inside the loop a line that is in charge of verifying that something is modified.
So at some point, this condition ends.
And in this case, what we would want to put to be a line that modifies the amount of coins and that
says, for example, coins now will be equal to the amount of coins we have, minus one.
Then in each loop I will be losing a coin and if I execute it now, it will tell me that I have five,
four, three, two, one.
And once the condition was no longer fulfilled because when it lost the last coin it was zero.
So coins is no longer greater than zero.
The loop was no longer repeated and it went to the next thing that since there was nothing there, the
program ended.
So I want to show you that there is a much more compact way to write this idea of coins equals coins
minus one, because you can say directly that coins is minus equals one.
This is not readable, but it means equal to the amount I have.
Minus what's next here?
Minus one in this case.
And if I run it, it works the same.
I can also put an else block, same as where we've done before with the loops for.
And here I else would say print something.
For example, I have no money anymore.
If we execute it, it's going to say five, four, three, two, one.
I have no money anymore.
It executed the else and it's gone.
This example may seem to you like it's predetermined in some way how many loops it's going to have,
because it's as if we could anticipate how many iterations this loop will do.
And you'll say that's basically the same thing a loop four does.
But although this is so in this example, the dynamics is pretty different because it's actually developing
during the execution.
Actually, I can incorporate here in the middle that makes it the programmer cannot anticipate how the
events are going to develop and how many repetitions are going to be executed.
As this code, it is now decided to go down one by one.
But what happens if I set the number of coins to be modified according to some user input?
Then I will lose control of what is going to happen.
Let's see it with an example.
We're going to create a variable called answer that starts with a string value y, and then we're going
to create a while loop that says that as long as answer is equal to why the loop is going to be executed.
So the first time it's going to be executed because answer is equal to why.
But then in the first line, we're going to program.
The answer changes.
This way we as programmers lose control because the user can give us anything back he or she wants.
Answer is going to be rewritten by the user.
So the prompt says something like Do you want to continue?
And then we're going to help him.
We're going to give him a hint he can put Y or N, for example.
Well, if the user puts y, the loop is going to keep repeating as many times as he or she keeps doing
that.
We're also going to add an else here so that in case the user does not enter Y.
So in case of anything else, what is going to happen is that thank you will be printed.
Perfect.
We're going to execute it.
And here it says, do you want to continue?
Yes or no?
Let's put yes, I want to continue and let's continue putting.
Yes, the why.
The why and the why.
How many times is it going to repeat?
Well, the programmer cannot anticipate it.
It depends on the behavior of the user.
So now I'm going to put NN and then it said thank you.
And finally we could get out of this loop.
That is a fundamental difference with the for loop.
In the for loop, I'm in control.
Somehow I can anticipate because it depends on variables that maybe I have control over in the while
loop.
It is not predetermined how many times it is going to happen because it depends on the dynamics of the
code execution.
So as I promised you, there are also some key words that you need to know to work with loops.
And this applies both with wild loop and the for loop.
And these keywords are the words pass, break and continue.
Pass is the first one we're going to look at.
Basically what pass does is to do nothing.
And you will be saying, Why do I want a code that does nothing?
Well, let's delete all this in code first.
And now imagine I'm programming here.
I am the programmer and I still don't know what I want this loop to do.
Or maybe I know.
But before writing it, I need to test some other stuff first.
So I want to continue programming something else.
So I get out.
I come here and I want to code a hello print.
If I execute this, I'm going to have an error because I leave the code without some action being completed
here.
So what?
As a programmer, I'm obliged to already know everything I need.
Do I.
Do I have to put a fake print here as a placeholder?
No, that's why Pass exists.
It takes care of all this place for me here so I can execute my code and I can go ahead and so on.
So that's the simple function of pass.
So strictly as a placeholder, that's how it's generally used.
We also have the word break.
And what break does is interrupting the current iteration of the loop that we're in and go straight
out of the loop.
So let's do it again with a user input.
We create a variable called name that is equal to an input that asks the user for their name.
Let's make it simple for the user.
Your name.
And now we're going to do a four loop that makes it so that every letter that exists in its name.
What it does is print letter.
Then if we execute this, it is going to ask me my name.
I say Federico, and it says Federico.
One letter at a time and is finished.
That's perfect.
It works very well.
But what if I want this program to stop when it encounters the letter R?
Is there a way to do that?
Well, yes.
And break is the best way to do it.
I can say here that if letter is equal to R, what I do is break and break is going to make that if
I put pull, nothing happens because there is no r.
But if I put Federico then since we do have an R here, it only gives me back 50 and it is interrupted
and the program ended immediately there.
There is no possibility for the following iterations to run.
For that, we also have the third magic word, which is continue and continue does something similar
to break because it interrupts the current iteration, but it does not interrupt the loop itself.
It only interrupts the actual iteration and it goes back to the beginning of the code block and continues
with the next iteration.
So if I say continue here instead of break and execute, once I put Federico or any name containing
the R, it will print fade, followed by IKO skipped here because the iteration was interrupted before
it got to the print.
But the loop didn't end here and it continued again with the next iterations and the remaining letters
were able to be printed.
These three words pass, break and continue are going to be your allies and facilitating the dynamics
of your loops.
I hope you've learned a lot and you can put them into practice in the exercises that follow next.
So I'm running into the next lecture because there is a lot more to learn.